California, mama. Le dije, pues, ven pronto. Vas y
recoges el trofeo y vienes pronto por mí. Le dije, y
yo me voy. Pues, entonces, se vino luego, luego, él
en el trofeo. Era un trofeo grande, nuevo.
Entonces, se viene él pronto. Y llegó a Blumenthal
con su esposa, porque ya estaba casada. So my
brother was there with his wife and all his
piscators. I got there and he said, Mom, I came for
you. So I came. Then my brother paid me what I had
piscated, and then I came. When I came,
I picked up como de 200 a 300 pesos la temporada que
yo, aparte de ropa, aparte de comida y de todo,
porque ganábamos muy buen dinero.
Todavía quedó mucho trabajo cuando yo me vine,
pero yo me tenía que venir porque mi muchacho había
ido por mí. Nomás llegamos aquí con mi mamá a
arreglar todo y a visitar Mi hermano y mi mamá.
Entonces dijo, mi mamá te vas a ir. Le dije sí. Me
fui, como siempre, con toda mi familia. Hasta
California. Este muchacho no sabía que yo iba por
él. But your husband doesn't go to California? No,
he always stayed in these places. In these places?
Yes, he never went to California. He never went
anywhere. He always stayed here. What kind of work
did he have? Oh, in labor. He always worked at the
ranch. Yes. He always liked to work at the ranch
because, well, I don't know, I think he had a lot of
education in Spanish. How much? Cuántos años de
educación? Pues yo no sé, porque él estudió no aquí
en México. En México. Él estuvo en México. Para
muchos años. No, not much. I think it was the first
one. The primary school in Mexico. The primary
school. Six years. That's what I know. And then, he
learned so well to speak. It seems that he had
studied English. He studied it, he read it, like
Spanish, and like speaking Spanish, he spoke
English and everything. Well, I didn't correct
him because I didn't know how to speak it. But the
people who heard him speak said, it seems that your
sir studied English. But no, he took it from the
people, but he had a very good head. He had a very
good head to learn it, you see? And he spoke it
like... Well, no, but I say in the language. He had
an accent to speak it, whether it was Spanish or
English. You see? Like this boy who is in Noste. I
tell you that he studied a little. That boy... He
writes very well in Spanish and English, and he
speaks it, and everything. And he studied very
little. Well, I don't know your time. I don't know
your time. How much time can you spend here? Here?
It's 11, 11 and a half. There's a lot of time left.
Well then,
there in California there were many, many fields.
No, thank you. There weren't many, there were many
fields in those years that
I was there in 55. There were many places, many
fields of many people from Mexico and everywhere.
Right? No. No? Yeah. Entonces, nosotros, ese
muchacho estaba en ese campo. Somebody went out to
the clubs, folks club. Estaba en ese campo cuando
nosotros llegamos y aproximadamente sería como
las cinco de la mañana cuando llegamos a ese lugar
donde estaba ese hijo que está ahorita en
California.
Then my boy, Pita,
arrives. And then he goes to Apea. He knew all his
places. He goes to Apea to look for him. He stops at
the door. You?
No, I'm kidding. And then... You? You here? Yes.
His mother.
He got
scared. I said,
son, get ready. I'll be back soon for you. He said,
well, I'm leaving soon. He got everything ready.
He went. He got on the truck and passed me by, very
happy. And he went with us to the place where we were
going. In that place is Farport, California.
That's where my boys were raised, all of them.
I worked there. very hard, me and my children.
We got there because a year before, a year ago it
was, we got to that place, we met a contractor from
that place who There was a very large field, as if it
were
a town. And that gentleman, very kind, he and his
wife, and I think he had three children, because
the other family was already separated.
Well, we got there, they gave us a little house
because all the apartments were small. And we
were... I don't know...
Seven,
approximately. We had to be in that little
room. So... Pure water, anywhere. There were
roads, yes, but it was water. Then it was
winter time. The boy, his son, had to go with my son,
who was the one we went to pick up from that place,
with the one who was in Washington, because he
lived there. So he said, well, you're going to have
to go and leave Washington. And I had to find
someone to go with him. So I went and told his
father, he's going to go. He gives permission to
his son to go with my son to Washington to go and
leave his sister. Yes, he says, of course, go. They
go. Después de que llegamos de Texas, otro día se
fueron para el estado de Washington. Ellos cuatro
llegaron a Washington, dejaron a mi hijo,
regresaron para atrás los dos. Bien, de salud.
Allí nos establecimos. Entonces ya tenía mi hijo,
que era el responsable de aquel troque, y de mí. in
that place.
So...
I never... I was able to solve all the problems I had
in my life. And I thank God that I didn't go to
school, but school was my mind and my head. Yes.
That was my school. A school of experiences. Yes,
even though I was very young, I got married at 16
years old, but God gave me that thought to direct,
give advice to my husband and give advice to my nine
children. and direct my person to me.
Well, at that time,
when I returned to California, I was not hopeful
about my husband. I was not hopeful about my
son. I was only hopeful about my person.
Yo estaba esperando el porvenir de la vida mía.
Yo llevaba
como a 300 pesos,
como a 300 a 400 pesos.
Yo tenía para salvar lo que atrás podía sobrevenir
en mí.
Entonces,
mi muchacho, este que está en California, ya no era
aquel. Ya era otro hombre. ¿Por qué? Porque ya no
había estado al lado mío. See? Because they
respected me. Because what I said, that's what I
did. Because that's how I imposed
them. So, yes, he... Todos mis hijos se casaron,
fueron al army, vinieron, han tomado ya de
hombres, ya de que ellos salieron del lado mío,
pero a mí no me han molestado. A mí no han sido mis
hijos desobedientes conmigo que diga, mis hijos
me han dicho esto, mis hijos me han dado lo otro a mí.
My children have seen me all the time.
And I don't have to say that my children have
treated me badly, no. No, no. Everything they can
do to me, they do. Everything I can say, they do.
They have never bothered me. It doesn't make them
arrogant, it doesn't bother me. And I tell them, if
you are going to drink, and you come to drink here to
my house, don't come. If you come healthy and well,
come. But don't drink. That is the time of the
married. But when they are at home and they come to
drink every now and then, they don't tell me
anything. Like this one who came from the service.
He was upset and everything, but you're going to
sleep and you're going to do this now. There's
nothing here. See? Everyone's like that. So I
don't have anything to say about them. It's just
that they've all been good. And they were nine
brothers. But those who were fighting, or those
who were cursing each other, they were nothing.
They, the first was the girl, who is the oldest.
They all played with their four little brothers or
their five little brothers. You are there, we
don't want you here, that you are with us. You are
there. And she was sitting there, just looking at
those who were playing. But she didn't mess with
them, because they didn't admit it. And she didn't
have any more girls to play with. She played with
what she had. She bought her a doll, she played with
that doll. She played with little things, but what
was she doing? No, nothing like that. They were
very good boys because that's how they got used to
it. The little brothers didn't have to fight. The
little brothers didn't have to say this or that.
Are all your daughters married? My daughters?
Only this one is left. That's all. She is not
married. She is not married, she is still here in
the house. How old is she? I think she is 24 years
old. And thank God that God has left her until now to
think well.
Well then, what did we do? No, we had a truck of the
year. I think I had only one year of use of the truck.
Well, I could
have saved my truck.
But sometimes that companies
see people who are
humble and they take over the position to do that.
You see?
Is your husband still alive? No. He died. In what
year? In 1965.
I was already here. I was here for about a month.
So... I told him, they sent a letter. And he said,
you know what? We're going to go for this truck. I
told him. I told my boy. Yo había mandado porque el
truco era de Washington y yo sé los reglamentos que
hay. Pero como yo nunca, yo puedo sacar un carro de
este estado y lo puedo llevar para otro estado.
Pero yo aviso y yo mando mi dinero. ¿Ves? Así no me
molesta, no le hace que esto venga con un carro
nuevo. Entonces, este... He said, well, the truck
is not here. He said, the truck is outside the
state. I said, they told me in the letter. And since
that truck was not in my name, it was in the name of
the older boy, So I had to talk to the older boy and I
told my boy. I had already sent the payment that was
behind that truck. But I didn't know how he had
taken it. So they say, here they come. As soon as
they sent me the letter, they sent whoever picked
it up. So I said to the boy, look, you're not going to
sign any papers. I said, why? They shouldn't pick
up that truck. I said, why? We were short of money.
We were short of 18 bucks. They shouldn't have
picked up the money, I said. Why? I already sent the
money. And how did they pick up the money? And now
they want to pick up the money. So they shouldn't
have picked up the money since they came to pick up
the money. And you're not going to sign anything.
And besides that, you shouldn't sign because it's
the boy's. The boy is the one who has to talk to him
and he has to sign it. What do you think they did?
They said, no, let's just go to the agency. Let's
go, he said, because they want him there. I said,
well, he's not the owner of the truck. Well, they
took him. On the way, they made my boy sign the
papers, telling him not to sign them. They took him
and put him in the agency. Oh, how did he think I was
so mortified? Well, then I went to look for the boy.
Well, no, he says, well, the truck. No, my boy came
and said, Mom, the truck stayed at the agency. Why
did you leave the truck at the agency? I didn't tell
you that you didn't have to sign any papers. He
said, well, they made me sign and they told me so
much. He says, but I already told you. Why did you do
it? That's why they took him where they were
talking to me, so that he could sign on the way, to
make him believe and he would sign. In these days,
where do your children
live? In these days, where do your children live?
There you go, Janie.
Yes, the food. Well, do your children now live all
here or in Washington and California? I have my
whole family irrigated. Look, come and see them.
Close it and come and see them. I have them all here.
Come and see them. Let's go. To see them, my boys, in
portrait. Oh, in portrait. In portrait. Just a
moment. But where do they live? Look. These now.
Now they are all irrigated. They are all... Near
here? No, they are in the States. I have one in
Philadelphia. In Philadelphia? She is married to
a Canadian. Oh, really? Yes. She had a lot of
education, my girl who is in Philadelphia. How old
is she? She studied to become a model. She finished
her school. Yes, that's good. And this other boy
who is in California. California. He's the boy I'm
talking about right now. He's studying to become a
minister. From what? Minister. Minister? Yes,
right now he already has five children. Ah, that's
nice. And he got rid of the Catholic religion. Yes.
Because he... me gustaba mucho tomar y pues yo
siempre batallé con él ves pero ahora que yo me vine
él se fue de donde se criaron ellos para san jose
california porque nosotros allí We have been
living in Farport, California for many years. And
what is his name? His name is Baristo, German.
And he is currently in San Jose, California. And he
is a minister of what? He is studying, he is still
not receiving. Of what church? Of
what church is Baristo Pentecostal, Eugenie?
Yaini!
Yaini! Well, it doesn't matter. Well, I think
it's... It's protestant. Yes, I think it's... No,
how do you say it? No... I think it's the God of
Jehovah. Yes. Yes. Y este otro, ahorita él reside
todo el tiempo y allá se crió en Washington. En
Washington. Toda su familia. Él es silvestre
alemán. Silvestre. Silvestre alemán es el más
chico de los cuatro gramos. Ah, sí. Y silvestre
vive en Washington. En Washington. ¿En qué
pueblo? En...
In Sunnyside. Sunnyside, Washington. Yes. Good.
Yes. And now he's in Idaho. Another Idaho? No,
himself. He himself comes to Idaho. Ah, yes. Yes.
Well, it's been a while since he left. Right now
he's in Nairajo because he came to see me. He was
here in Washington. He was here in El Valle. Yes. He
was there. And a month ago he went over there. And
right now he's in Nairajo. Ah, yes. Yes. But he
lives there in Washington. Yes. Yes, he raised his
family there. He has five families. And what kind
of work did he have? Well, he did work. He is a truck
driver. Oh, yes. Yes, he works right now in the
trucks.
Yes. He was, he spent his years as a potato loader.
Yes. All the potatoes. Now he doesn't drive a
truck, he owns a truck and he works with his trucks.
And that's where his work has gone. And this other
boy that I'm telling you is studying, he works
right now in the city. de trabajos esos de... con
una... tiene también un troque de dompe y él hace
freeways en las casas. Ah, sí. ¿Dónde vive él? He is
the one who lives in San Jose. Oh, in San Jose. Yes,
well. This is three. That's right. And right now I
have in Austin, I have two children. Two children?
Yes. What is Graviel in German? Graviel, the
oldest. Yes, the oldest is in Austin. He, all his
life, he liked to be a mechanic. Yes. Because when
he went to the service, he wanted to study for that.
Yes. But he didn't pass the tests of the
applications for that. Yes. But he... through his
head. He practiced and he practiced. He has a gas
station in Austin. A gas station in his country?
Yes. And he is a mechanic. And he manages
that gas station. And his boy too. His boys too, but
now one of them got married. Right now he only has
one son and they all got married. Well, he had two
daughters and two sons. Yes. And the other son who
lives in Austin is? Right now, the youngest boy is
Roel, German, who is the youngest. He lives in
Austin. Yes. But he, I'm not very practical to say
where he works, but He
married, no one knew that he could marry a girl from
a family that I have known for many years. All my
family, the first one was raised with that Basque
family, right? Now that we came from California,
He met with that girl and with that Vázquez family,
who was from Robestán, and that's where that
family grew up, but he went to Austin. So this boy,
as he was going all the time, because they
recognize him as his father, who is the oldest boy,
he always wanted to be there when we came, looking
at his brother and helping him in the garage. Ah,
yes. Yes, he always likes to come to work and there.
That is five and six. Where does the boy or girl six
live? Well, it's this one. This one that I'm
telling you about. This one that I'm telling you
about, he got married and he thought about it very
well because he has He got married, he got married
to a very good girl, and she has a very good job. She
works in the office of the telephone and
insurance. She fixed all of that. He got married,
he did his application, and then he left because he
worked here in the pants factory. The pants
factory. Since he left school, my boy worked
there. What was his name? Roel Alemán is the one I'm
talking about. Roel Alemán. And he lives here. No,
he lives in Austin. In Austin. In Austin. He's the
youngest of the greats. Yes, yes, yes. All right,
yes. So, he worked here, got married, and left
work, and applied, and then he left. So, he came in
with his father-in-law to do all this work. Yes. Of
carpentry and everything. He... He told his wife,
let's both work together because those workshops
are very big. He did the application and he has a
very good memory. So he took, they gave him to
study, he passed all the exams of that class of
work. Y ahorita tiene el muy buen trabajo y le
dieron una máquina para que él estudiara mucho
eso. Ese trabajo que está haciendo él es de puro
botón. Puro botón. Bueno. And now he works at
night. And he learned all of that very soon. All of
that. They taught him there very soon. And there
they gave him his job. And now both of them are doing
very well. Both of them. And both of them are
working there in that place. Yes. And he, well,
there are boys who didn't go to school because of
that. And they don't have the job that he has now.
And he very soon. Yes. And there he is. And he's
making very good money, both of them. And right
now, his car has already been paid. He's just going
to complete his two years of marriage. He bought a
little car of those pretty ones. A little station.
Yes. Now he has his... Now he says he already
ordered his new pickup. And he has his house,
small, new, his place, all surrounded, all very
well arranged, and he is the smallest. Yes. All of
them have thought, well, well. Yes. Yes. And this,
and now this, this girl is just, ah, well, my boy,
like right now, And those are the five boys. Rudy,
well, he lives here. He got married. He has his
property here. Then he bought all that property
and built his house. In this town? In this town.
You're talking about the ones outside? Yes. Well,
that's all the ones I have outside of here. Yes. All
these. Right now, the only ones I have here is this
girl. This one. Yes. In the state of Texas. In the
state of Texas, there is Rudy,
Reina. Reina lives here. Yes. With her husband.
Yes. And, Rabiel, Roel, they are here. And Janie.
Janie, the youngest. Yes, she is here in the house.
Y el muchacho, mi muchacho el que murió, porque
murió uno en un accidente en California.
Él dejó sus tres hijos, que fue el que se le sigue el
segundo del mayor. Y él murió en un accidente. Allá
fue en California, porque él When I left, he got
married, and he stayed here. He stayed here. As
soon as he got married, I left. When I was three
years old, I came back. Then I made myself a little
house. Because then I worked very hard for three
years.
And I was one of those who pecked the plums, pecked
the nuts.
Piscaba, bueno, todo lo que, las corridas que
había de las, de las frutas. Sí. En California, no
todos los años, nomás ciertos años los trabajé.
Nomás una corrida así hasta el día que me vine pa'
Texas. Entonces él, el cincuenta
y cinco mismo se fue él a verme. with his family. He
already had two children, and he went to see me. So,
I was going to be there for the next three years. So
he said, I'm going there. He said, are you going? He
said, yes. So we came. He made this little tree that
I have there, to bring us everything. Y yo, ya se me
habían casado el hijo que me acompañaba, ese que
está en California.
Entonces, este nos fue a traer, pa' vernos y pa'
traernos. Él se trajo el carro de nosotros con la
trela. Y mi nuera se trajo su carro de ellos con mi
muchachito este, Rudy. And his children, he came
with his children
and he died. And then I sent him money to make me that
little room because I didn't have anywhere to be.
And he did it. It was a little room like
this. I came. And I had surgery here, from my sight,
from both eyes, I had surgery. And it cost me 100
pesos the healing of each eye. I relieved myself.
In 1956, my boys were here at school. They had never
been here in Texas at school, but that year they
were here because I had surgery from the sight. So
they left school, and they just left and we left.
back to California. So, my son left his wife and
children. And he took them back to California,
because at that time, I was the only one who had the
eldest daughter. But she also laughed, but he
always wanted to leave some, but with his wife's
will. So, He was working there with me for a while.
He was doing very well. He worked. He wanted to
continue his studies. He followed the school. The
first year he went, he worked with us, with his
wife, because he wanted to go to school. And the
first year that he went to see us went very well, and
that was when we came with him. The second year that
he left us, that was in 1956, he was working too. And
he continued his school to compose televisions.
And he put up a fruit shop there on the 9th.
He went, they, he was very Catholic in the
mornings, he went very early, it was Sunday, and
they went to Mass, he with his children and his
wife, because they were both very Catholic. Very
early they went to Mass, and after Mass, they would
go to the shop they had, to sell, because he wanted
to continue. And he was granted. So, when he left
me, he came to work with his family and they came
back. He continued his school and finished it. And
he told me that he was leaving. So I waited for him.
When he came back, I waited for him. So I was going to
come back that year. So I told my son, my son, I'm
writing to your grandmother. What do you say? What
do I tell you? Are you going to go back with us or not?
He says, Mom, I already told my grandma that I'm not
going to go back. I'm going to go until next year. He
says, what I want, you know what, Mom? You're going
to go there. I want you to come there. And you go
there and bring my grandmother. And I don't want to
go there anymore. And he says, you know very well
that it's always very hard there. And well, it's
hard for one to be there. Here the jobs are paid
better. Well, then I told my mother. It's a bad luck
that my son was about a month old, I think.
Approximately a month old when this happened. He
made applications, because as he was already
known in that mill in Britain, he made
applications
to work. He had already fixed his place to put
television work, because there was none in that
place.
She says, Mom, I've fixed the place where I'm going
to live and where I'm going to put to work. She says,
and then I'm going to put Ruri too, to help me sell.
I said to him, what I don't want is for you to apply as
soon as you arrived at the BRIT. He said, mom, we
came to work and maybe it will take a long time to
talk to me. I said to him, it's better that you rest
and then apply. He says, no, he says, well, after
all, when they call me, while I'm working, he says,
there on the TV, he says, look, I already grabbed
three people, I already grabbed what I'm going to
buy and everything, I already
sold them. Well, son, I told him, but I didn't want
to. Well, nothing, if they hadn't talked to him
late, they talked to him soon. He said, Mom, they
already told me. I said, what do you mean? Well, I
don't know. He went to work when they told him. He
was going to a party, I don't know what party, when
the mayordomos were going. Muy a la carrera,
porque cada que les dan off, se ponen bien
contentos y todo. Porque cuando mi hijo me
escribía las cartas de aquí de Texas, todo el
tiempo decía, mamá, voy a tener off tal día, dice.
Voy a descansar. Ese día, así les dijeron. Yo
andaba trabajando y siempre, siempre, yo todo el
tiempo los he encomendado a Dios. ¿Dónde
ese día se me pasa a mí? Tanto que se me pasa decir por
Él. Y me voy yo al trabajo. I walked about a mile or
two away
from the town. Then they say that at lunchtime they
were eating, and everyone was eating and talking,
because they were going to be off. And then they
ate, and another friend of his He said, are you
leaving? Yes, he said, I'm leaving. He said,
because I'm looking at you. He said, no, don't go.
He said, I don't know what they were giving him more
than food. He said, no, he said, I don't want it
anymore. And you know that my boy, all the time,
since he started school, he lived all the time in
his pocket. Everything he needed, he brought it
there. All his papers, everything he needed, he
brought
it there. Then he left. The other boy stayed there.
But after a while, he also said that he was leaving.
There were exits outside the mill and there was a
lot of loose sand. The roads had to go to Hacina.
This road from the mill went to Hacina. And from the
end, the trucks had to go to Hacina. The trucks of
the mayordomos came very slow to Hacina. And this
went to Hacina. A lot of land entered the road.
Where my boy was going to come from, he came from
Sina, with a lot of land. With a lot of land, this
friend of his came. He hit him. He hit him. Look at
the door. It jumped. He was stuck. A wire got in
here. What was left in his heart? The shock wire got
in here. He was stuck. They had to put something in
to get
him out. So... This is a lack of precaution. Yes.
This truck, they say he had already said, because
that was the victim, he was a friend, and he himself
killed him. Yes. Because they had already said
that this truck did not have enough manpower.